## Mock mid-term exam {-}

This MOCK test consists entirely of multiple choice questions. Please
allocate your time wisely among these.\
Note that not all of these questions are worth the same amount: this is
clearly indicated below. Answer multiple choice questions on MCQ answer
sheet. 

\

###

(skip this)

###

Choose ONE. Which of the following best represents 'repeated cross-sectional firm-level micro-data that may be used to test whether firms that engage in CSR (corporate social responsibility) activities tend to be in more heavily-regulated industries'?

A.  A table of the average number of employees engaged in CSR per firm,
    estimates of the regulatory involvment, and amount spent on
    political lobbying in 2017, aggregated across the largest employment
    sectors: professional services, manufacturing, and retail.

B.  A data set with ten observations, one for each of the years
    2010-2018 for a single small firm. Each observation (row) contains
    ten variables (columns) detailing the CSR expenditure, profit, and
    estimated regulatory burden for this firm, based on a survey on
    their CSR activities and spending, cross-checked against their
    public financial reportings.

C.  A dataset of US firms between the years 1990-2015. Each year a
    different representative sample of 1000 firms are chosen and given a
    survey on their CSR activities and spending, cross-checked against
    their public financial reportings. Each firm's 4-digit SIC industry
    code is reported and merged to an independent measure of regulatory
    burden by industry by year.

D.  A dataset of individual tax reportings (income, asset balances and
    liabilities, corporate taxes paid, dividends paid, inventory
    depreciation, loan interest, salaries and national insurance
    payments, and tax-favored capital investment and research) from all
    small UK firms between the years 1950-2015.

E.  An excerpt of the findings from a report on the tax and regulatory
    burden and CSR activities of EU-based firms between 1970 and 2015.

    \

Correct: A dataset of US firms between the years 1990-2015. Each year a
different representative sample of 1000 firms are chosen and given a
survey on their CSR activities and spending, cross-checked against their
public financial reportings. Each firm's 4-digit SIC industry code is
reported and merged to an independent measure of regulatory burden by
industry by year.

\Â 

Note, the other choices depict, respectively: a. aggregated data (not
micro-data, not firm-level data) b. a panel dataset not repeated
cross-section. Also not particular useful for testing this relationship;
one firm will not lead to any variation in 'which industry' d. Panel
data. More importantly, it doesn't seem to have any information on CSR
or on regulatory burden. e. This is a \*report\* not data.



By the way, note that the question about CSR is not a 'causal question';
just a question about an observed relationship.

\

###

*(Choose ONE)* Which of the following fields of Economics typically uses
the most pure mathematics?

A.  Applied microeconomics

B.  Empirical labour economics

C.  Microeconomic theory

D.  Macroeconomics of growth

E.  Development economics

Microeconomic theory. Although you may be used to thinking of 'theory'
as a bunch of woolly verbiage, in Economics it involves very formal
mathematics (especially Real Analysis) and logic.

\

###
*(Choose all that are correct, and no more.)* Suppose we observe prices
and quantities traded in a market over a period of time. In such a case,
fitting a line through these points will provide a reasonable valid
estimate of a market *supply* curve\... (Choose ALL that are *necessary*
for this.)

A.  if the supply curve was constant over this period.

B.  if this was a period when the demand curve was constant and the
    supply curve was shifting.

C.  if this data pertains to several dissimilar products, and we cannot
    separate these products in the data set.

D.  if the demand curve shifted over this period.

E.  if the supply curve is approximately linear.

\


TRUE: a. if the supply curve was constant over this period.

d. if the demand curve shifted over this period.

e. if the supply curve is approximately linear.

\

False:

"if this was a period when the demand curve was constant and the supply
curve was shifting." --- this is a condition for estimating a *demand*
curve not a supply curve.

"if this data pertains to several dissimilar products, and we cannot
separate these products in the data set." ---With several unrelated
products it is unclear what this relationship would be depicting

\

###

*Choose ONE.* Suppose that, over a number of years, a country randomly
(by lottery) selected people from an eligible pool to attend university,
and all who were selected attended university, and all who were not
selected did not attend any university. Suppose that, for this country,
on average those who attended university earned significantly more than
those who did not. In such a case, which of the following statements is
most correct?

A.  This offers no valid evidence on the income returns to education
    because correlation is not causation.

B.  This provides substantial evidence that attending university leads
    to higher wages, at least in the context of this country.

C.  This proves that if one's parents earn a higher wage one is more
    likely to attend university, at least in the context of this
    country.

D.  This provides substantial evidence that education is a luxury good.

E.  None of the above

\

TRUE: (b) This provides substantial evidence that attending university
leads to higher wages, at least in the context of this country.

*Discussion:* This seems to describe an ideal 'natural experiment' for
testing the impact of attending university on earnings, all else equal.
In this case it *is* reasonable to infer a causal relationship!

\


FALSE: all other answers\...

Yes, 'correlation is not causation' but that doesn't invalidate this
evidence. \...

There was nothing mentioned about parents\...

A luxury good is basically one where a "1%" increase in income leads to
a larger than 1% increase in amount of the good consumed. \... here the
causality is in the opposite direction, and anyways this is a different
issue.


\
\


<center> **UTILITY AND CHOICE** </center>


###

*(Choose all that are correct, and no more.)* According to the standard
classical assumptions over *ordinal* utility functions and over budget
constraints:

A.  We can observe whether an individual's utility increases over time
    by recording their happiness.

B.  Utility functions are expressed as a direct function of prices and
    income, holding the quantity of goods consumed $(x_1,x_2,...,x_n$)
    constant .

C.  For a utility function in $n$ goods $u(x_1,x_2,...,x_n)$ the
    combinations of $(x_1,x_2,...x_n)$ that yield a particular utility
    level all lie on the same 'indifference curve.' An individual
    utility function implies an infinite number of indifference curves.

D.  Utility functions are 'homogenous of degree zero': doubling all
    arguments will lead to the same level of utility.

E.  Maximising a utility function $U(x,y)$ subject to a budget
    constraint $p_xX  + p_yY \leq  I$ will yield the same choices (of x
    and y) as maximizing this same utility function subject to the
    budget constraint $100p_xX  + 100p_yY \leq  I$, i.e, multiplying
    prices by 100 but leaving income unchanged.

\


TRUE: c. For a utility function in $n$ goods $u(x_1,x_2,...,x_n)$ the
combinations of $(x_1,x_2,...x_n)$ that yield a particular utility level
all lie on the same 'indifference curve.' An individual utility function
implies an infinite number of indifference curves.

\

Other answers are false\... respectively

a\. The standard view of utility functions is that they are \*not\*
directly measurable

b\. No, utility functions are a function of the goods and services
consumed. (Here we are describing \*indirect\* utility, which we did not
cover)

d\. Utility functions are not Homogenous of degree zero (\*demand
functions\* are)

e\. The statement would only be correct if we \*also\* multiplied income
by 100. Otherwise they certainly cannot choose the same amounts of each
, they wouldn't be able to afford it.


\

###


![](picsfigs/scalping.png){height="5in"}

[*Choose TWO. Partial credit will NOT be awarded.*]{style="color: gray"}
Suppose the NFL had a 'rationing policy', where each consumer could buy
at most one ticket to the Super Bowl. Suppose the diagram above
represents each consumer's budget constraint and two of her indifference
curves. The maximum amount she would be willing to pay to buy an
additional (second) ticket is characterised by the vertical distance
between (______________)

and

(____________)

(choose two):

A.  A

B.  B

C.  C

D.  D

\


Ans: B and D

Discussion: Paying an additional amount equal to the vertical distance
between B-D (giving up this amount of 'other goods') and obtaining a
second ticket would put her at point D. This point leaves her as well
off as the point she was at before, point B. Thus this is the *most* she
would pay for the second ticket.

\


###

![](picsfigs/fig2-2.png){height="4in"}

*(Choose all that are correct, and no more.)* Considering the above
indifference curve, which of the following are true?

A.  At point A she is willing to give up approximately 2 hamburgers to
    gain 1 soft drink.

B.  At point D she is willing to give up more than one hamburger to gain
    one soft drink.

C.  For this consumer, these goods are perfect complements, although not
    at a 1-1 ratio.

D.  This consumer would strictly prefer to consume at point C than to
    consume at point A.

E.  The indifference curve demonstrates an *diminishing* marginal rate
    of substitution between the two goods; at a higher level of
    hamburger consumption, she requires *fewer* soft drinks to be
    willing to give up a hamburger.

\


True statements:

(a) At point A she is willing to give up approximately 2 hamburgers to gain
1 soft drink

*and*

(e) The indifference curve demonstrates an *diminishing* marginal rate of
substitution between the two goods; at a higher level of hamburger
consumption, she requires *fewer* soft drinks to be willing to give up a
hamburger.

\

###

If, starting from any level of consumption (with a positive consumption
of plankton), a individual can hold her utility constant by reducing her
consumption of plankton by 1 and increasing her consumption of algae by
10, then, for this individual, algae and plankton are (select only one):

A.  perfect substitutes

B.  perfect complements

C.  complements (but not perfect complements)

D.  substitutes (but not perfect substitutes)

E.  inferior goods


\

perfect substitutes.


*Note*: remember that perfect substitutes require the MRS to be a
*constant* ratio, but that ratio need not be 1:1.

\
\

<center> **DEMAND, ITS DERIVATION AND ITS PROPERTIES** </center>


###

*(Choose all that are correct, and no more.)*
![](picsfigs/pricechangeneteffect.png){height="4in"}

The diagram above depicts two of an individual's indifference curves and
depicts her budget constraint before and after a price decrease, as well
as the compensated budget constraint at the initial point. For this
individual, within this range of prices, and for this income level, we
know that good X (*Clarification: good X is the good depicted on the horizontal
axis*) can be classified as:

A.  a normal good

B.  an inferior good

C.  a Giffen good

D.  a useless good

E.  a luxury good


\

an inferior good



*Discussion:* The movement between the choice made given the
(hypothetical) budget constraint SC and the actual 'new' budget
constraint BC2 depicts the income effect of the price change. Note that
this movement is the same as would occur from an increase in income
given the new price ratio. 

\

Over this range we see that this 'hypothetical increase in income' leads
to a decrease in consumption of the X good\... the horizontal movement
from B to C. Thus in this range it's an inferior good. Note that as it's
inferior it cannot be normal or luxury.

However, the net effect of decrease in the price of the X good
(including substitution and income effects) is the movement from A to C.
This is an *increase* in the consumption of the X good, so it is not
Giffen. (The substitution effect outweighed the income effect.)


The x good is not 'useless' as the indifference curves are not
horizontal.

\

###

[*Choose ONE.*]{style="color: gray"} Which of the following functional
forms for utility suggests the greatest substitution effect of a 0.20
increase in the price of X when starting from the point where
$P_X =P_Y-0.10$?

A.  $U(X,Y) =2X+2Y$

B.  $U(X,Y) = XY$

C.  $U(X,Y) = 2 \times min(X,Y)$

D.  $U(X,Y)=X^4Y^3$

E.  $U(X,Y)=Y$


\

$U=2X+2Y$ Â 

*Discussion:* This is a challenging question.

We can rule out some of these immediately.

$U(X,Y)=Y$ implies only good Y is valued, so no substitution is
possible\... and in fact the price change in X will have no impact

$U(X,Y) = 2 \times min(X,Y)$ represents perfect complements (at ratio
A.1); we know there is no substitution effect here as there is only a
*single* point (the vertex of the L-shaped indifference) curve that
yields a particular level of utility at the minimum cost.

\



Choice (a) $U(X,Y) =2X+2Y$ stands out. This is 'perfect substitutes'
(here at ratio 1:1) . For this case the consumer chooses the good with
greater 'bang for the buck' (MU/p). Either this 'better BftB' is the
same before and after the price change (in which case there's no
change), or it switches to the other good, leading to the 'maximum
possible substitution.' Here both X and Y have the same MU, so the
consumer will simply choose the cheaper one. Before the increase X was
cheaper, but afterwards Y is cheaper. $\rightarrow$ maximum possible
substitution!

\

Finally, consider the utility functions $U(X,Y) = XY$ and
$U(X,Y)=X^4Y^3$. These are basically U-shaped (in fact they are
Cobb-douglas), so there will be *some substitution effect.* However, for
these, for any positive price of each good a positive amount of each
will be consumed. (Why? Because otherwise you get *no utility*!) So the
substitution will not be 'a complete switch from one good to the other.'

\

###
*(Choose all that are correct, and no more.)* Suppose, at a particular
consumption choice that an individual is considering, her MRS (of cider
for beer) is 2:1. That is, at this point under consideration she is
willing to give up 2 ciders to gain an extra beer. This choice is
definitely \*not\* *optimal* *if*

A.  the price of beer is less than the price of cider, and the choice
    being considered involves a positive amount of cider.

B.  the price of beer is more than twice the price of cider, and this
    choice involves consuming both beer and cider.

C.  the price of beer is more than three times the price of cider

D.  there are goods that give her utility other than beer and cider.

E.  the price of beer is exactly twice that of cider.

NOT optimal if:

the price of beer is less than the price of cider, and the choice being
considered involves a positive amount of cider.

Nor if the price of beer is more than twice the price of cider, and this
choice involves consuming both beer and cider. (or actually, if it
involves consuming any beer)

\



*Discussion:* At this point, at the margin (i.e., considering very small
adjustments) she values beer twice as much as cider. Thus, if this point
involves consuming both beer and cider, it can only be optimal if the
price of beer is twice that of cider. If the relative price of
beer:cider is less than 2:1 she should move towards consuming more beer
and less cider. If the relative price appears more than this, she should
move towards consuming less beer and more cider.

However, if the price of beer is less than twice that of cider and she
is consuming no cider than this still may be optimal as she cannot
consume 'less than zero cider'.

Similarly, if the price of beer is more than twice that of cider and she
is consuming no beer than this still may be optimal as she cannot
consume 'less than zero beer'.

Â 
\

*Remember* to read the questions carefully; note that this question is
asking for conditions such that a particular choice is *NOT* optimal.

\

###

*(Choose ONE)* Suppose the economy consists of five consumers, each of
whom have an individual demand curve for figs equal to $q_d(p) = 10-p$.
Which of the following represents the *market demand* for figs:

A.   $Q_d =  10-p$

B.   $Q_d =  10-p$

C.   $Q_d =  50-5p$

D.   $Q_d =  50-p$

E.   $Q_d =  50$

\


$Q_d =  50-5p$

*Discussion:* we simply sum the demand curves 'horizontally' \... I.e.,
at every price add the quantity demanded by each of the five consumers,
so $Q_d = 5 \times q_d(p) = 5 \times(10-p) = 50-5p.$

\

###

*(Choose all that are correct, and no more.)* Which of the following
will NOT *shift* the market demand curve for good X, $Q^{d}(X)$?

A.  The price of good X rises.

B.  The price of another good Y falls

C.  The wealthiest 10% of consumers see their income fall by Â£10,000
    each, while the least wealthy 90% of consumers see their income rise
    by Â£10,000 each, leading to no change in total income

D.  Consumers' preference for good X changes

E.  Costs of producing good X fall, shifting the supply curve

\

*Correct choices = things that will NOT shift $Q^{d}(X)$*:

\(a) The price of good X rises -- NO, this represents a movement along
the demand curve for X AND

\(e) Costs of producing good X fall, shifting the supply curve -- NO the
shift in the supply curve doesn't enter into the market demand curve

\

*Incorrect choices = things that will or might shift $Q^{d}(X)$*:

The price of another good Y falls: if the goods are complements then
$Q^{d}(X)$ will shift out--- more quantity of X demanded at every price
$P_X$. If the goods are substitutes than $Q^{d}(X)$ will shift inwards.


The wealthiest 10% of consumers\... : as we've noted even if average
income does not change a shift in the composition of income may impact
the demand curve\... Here we see a redistribution of income towards the
wealthy. If X is a luxury good (in the relevant range) this should shift
the demand curve outwards; if it's a necessity (or even more extreme, an
inferior good) this will shift it inwards.



Consumers' preference for good X changes: Obviously this shifts the
demand curve

\

###

*(Choose ONE)* Should a price-setting firm ever set its price at a point
where demand is inelastic? Why or why not?

A.  Yes, because if demand were elastic, a rise in price would reduce
    quantity and thus reduce revenue.

B.  Yes, because revenue is maximized where demand is the most
    inelastic.

C.  No, because if it were at such a point, it could lower its price and
    its revenue would increase and costs would decline.

D.  No, because if it were at such a point, it could raise its price and
    its revenue would increase and costs would decline.

    \

No, because if it were at such a point, it could raise its price and its
revenue would increase and costs would decline.

*Discussion:* With inelastic demand, at the margin, a price increase of
some percentage will cause a smaller percentage decrease in quantity
demanded, and thus a rise in revenue. As less is needed to be produced,
cost will also decline.

\

###

![](picsfigs/subst_income_effects.png){height="4in"}

*Choose TWO. Partial credit will NOT be awarded for this question.* In
the graph above, the price of X has decreased, yielding the 'new budget
constraint.' The *income* effect of this price change (on X) is the
movement between points (choose TWO):

A.  0

B.  $X^{\ast}$

C.  $X_B$

D.  $X^{\ast\ast}$

E.  $Y^{\ast}$

\

$X_B$ and $X^{\ast\ast}$

*Discussion:* This is straight out of the web book and textbook.

\

\

<center> **PRODUCTION FUNCTIONS AND COSTS** </center>

\

###

Suppose MPL = 20 and MPK = 40 and the rental rate on capital is Â£10. If
the level of production is currently efficient (and both capital and
labour are used, with an everywhere-diminishing MRTS), the wage rate
must be

A.  Â£10

B.  Â£5

C.  Â£20

D.  Â£40

\

b: 5 pounds. The MRTS must equal the price ratio. Thus $MPL/MPK=w/r$ so
here $20/40=5/10$


\

###
*(Choose all that are correct, and no more.)* Suppose the production
function for good q is given by $q(K,L) = 3K + 2L$ where K and L are
capital and labour inputs.

Which of the following statements are true?

Consider three statements about this function:

A.  The function exhibits constant returns to scale.

B.  The function exhibits increasing returns to scale.

C.  The function exhibits diminishing marginal productivity for each
    input (holding the other input constant).

D.  The function exhibits constant marginal productivities for each
    input (holding the other input constant).

E.  A positive amount of both inputs are required to produce a positive
    output.

\

The function exhibits constant returns to scale (doubling K and L
doubles outputs, for example

\*and\*

The function exhibits constant marginal productivities for each input:
output increases at rate 2 per labour input and at rate 3 per capital
input

\

###

*(Choose all that are correct, and no more.)* Which of the following
statements are correct, regarding a firm's cost curve?

A.  Total costs are the sum of fixed and variable costs

B.  Economists include consumer surplus in their definition of revenues.

C.  If Average Cost (AC) increases in quantity, the Average Cost (AC)
    curve must be above the Marginal Cost (MC) curve for each level of
    output.

D.  The MC curve intersects the AC curve at its maximum (if a maximum
    exists).

E.  If marginal costs are increasing and there are no fixed costs, this
    implies increasing AC everywhere.

\

TRUE: Total costs are the sum of fixed and variable cost 

If marginal costs are increasing and there are no fixed costs, this
implies increasing AC everywhere.

\

The others are false. Consumer surplus is not a part of revenue, it's an
entirely different thing.

If Average Cost (AC) increases in quantity, the Average Cost (AC) curve
must be BELOW the Marginal Cost (MC) curve for each level of output.

The MC curve intersects the AC curve at its MINIMUM (if a MINIMUM
exists). \... AC could be everywhere above MC if there is a fixed cost.

**Profit maximisation and supply, Perfect competition, general equilibrium and efficiency**


\

###

*(Choose ONE.)* Suppose the market demand curve for a good follows
$Q_D = 100 - P$ and the market supply follows $Q_S = -10 + P$. What is
the total *revenue* of firms (expenditure of consumers) on this product,
in equilibrium?

A.  -45

B.  -1000

C.  -2475

D.  -3025

E.  None of the above.

\

100-P = P-10 $\rightarrow$ 2p = 110 $\rightarrow$ P=55 $\rightarrow$ Q =

100-55=55-10=45. Revenue = Q\*P = 45\*55 =2475


\

###

*(Choose ONE.)* Under perfect competition, if an industry is
characterized by positive economic profits in the short run

A.  firms will leave the market in the long run and the short-run supply
    curve will shift outward.

B.  firms will enter the market in the long run and the short-run supply
    curve will shift outward.

C.  firms will enter the market in the long run and the short-run supply
    curve will shift inward.

D.  firms will leave the market in the long run and the short-run supply
    curve will shift inward.
    
\

b: firms will enter the market in the long run and the short-run supply
curve will shift outward.



\

###

*(Choose all that are correct, and no more.)* Markets can fail to
achieve efficiency for the following reason(s)

A.  There are prices consumers do not think are fair.

B.  There are wages workers do not think are fair.

C.  Trade puts people out of work.

D.  There are barriers to entry, leading to monopolies.

E.  There are too many consumers.

\

e\. There are barriers to entry, leading to monopolies.

\



<center> **PUBLIC GOODS** </center>



\

###


*(Choose all that are correct, and no more.)* Which of the following are most reasonably considered public goods?

A.  Clothing

B.  A giant wedge of cheese

C.  Headache medicines provided to individuals for free by the NHS

D.  Useful and interesting knowledge generated from an archeological
    discovery

E.  An earthquake-prevention system that successfully prevents
    earthquakes from occuring

\

Correct: Useful and interesting knowledge generated from an
archeological discovery Correct: An earthquake-prevention system that
successfully prevents earthquakes from occuring

Both of these are reasonably considered nonrival and nonexcludable, ergo
Public Goods.

\
<center> **END OF PAPER** </center>
